[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>She was altruistic and
totally ambitious to attract
the attention of the world.
>>She was a genius.
Nobody before her
had the audacity
to try to do a global
reinterpretation
of spirituality the
way that she did.
>>At a time when
women, like children,
were expected to be
seen and not heard,
it was said that she
left her husbands
to become a trick in the circus.
Traveling alone, she
entered forbidden Tibet.
She was a spiritual genius,
and the mother of the new age.
On the other hand,
there are those
who say she was a fraud,
whose one real talent was
she knew how to
tell a good tale.
>>Magnetic personality.
She was a good storyteller.
>>A fascinating
conversationalist
who attracted people
everywhere she went.
>>Given her lifelong concern
with things mystical,
metaphysical, and
spiritual, it's
perhaps surprising
to discover that she
had an affect on
the world we know
in ways we could hardly imagine.
>>Nobody else could give
what she gave to the world.
>>Helena Petrovna
Blavatsky, Madame Blavatsky,
HPB-- whatever you call
her, she a larger than life
woman, a true
spiritual traveler.
Few would contest
her right to be
called the mother
of the new age.
Before HPB, every
right-thinking European
knew that the
religions of the East
were superstitions followed
by gullible members of lesser
races.
Blavatsky would make
it commonplace to see
Eastern religions,
Hinduism, and Buddhism
as important sacred teachings
that some might consider
superior to those of
the Christian West.
East and West live
much closer today
than HPB's contemporaries
could've ever dreamed.
It's not just that you can
eat a hamburger in Singapore
for dim sum in Toronto.
The roads built by exploitation,
colonization, and commerce
became the highways of
intercultural exchange.
>>Let's take a moment
first to thank yourself
for practicing yoga today.
>>Few in the Toronto
of the 19th century
would have never heard of
yoga, let alone practiced it.
>>For taking this
time to connect
with yourself and
the world around you.
>>Today, in almost any
city on the planet,
you can use between
dozens of flavors
of this ancient physical and
mystical practice of India.
Whether you prefer it stripped
of religious implications
or in a more
traditional form, you
can buy your specialized yoga
clothes, slippers, pillow,
or mat, and none of your
friends will even blink an eye.
It's not just yoga that has
become part of Western life.
It's everything from
crystals to religious icons
to books on esoteric secrets
of the East and West.
Not that long ago,
these concepts
would have seemed
very odd to us indeed.
>>The most important
thing about Blavatsky
is her role in
trying to synthesize
a global spirituality that
explains all religions.
That's something that is almost
standard now among new age
gurus of various sorts, but
she was the first person
who took on the task
of trying to explain
the entire gamut of
human spirituality.
And to embody what
she had learned
in the course of studying all
these religious traditions
in a spiritual path
that somehow transcended
and incorporated all of them.
>>There is a road,
steep and thorny,
beset with perils of every
kind, but yet a road,
and it leads to the
heart of the universe.
I can tell you how to find
those who will show you
the secret gatway that
leads inward only.
For those who wend
onwards, there
is reward past all
telling-- the power
to bless and save humanity.
For those who fail,
there are other lives
in which success may come.
This woman who
was ahead of time,
who had an impact on our
world in far-reaching ways,
began life as Helena
Petrovna von Hahn.
>>She was born in what is
today the Ukraine in 1831.
She came from a fairly
prominent family.
>>Her father was
a military officer
who was frequently
away from home,
and sometimes took the family
with him to far-flung spots
in the expanding Russian empire.
>>Her mother was one of
Russia's most respected writers.
And because she
wrote about women
and what miserable
lives they had,
she was known as the
Russian George Sand.
>>She showed some
tendency towards what
we would call psychic
phenomena, and was a rather
impetuous child-- very
independent minded.
>>She was beginning
in childhood,
but more in adolescence,
also exposed
to Russian occultism in
the form of free masonry
is Rosicrucianism, because
her great-grandfather had
a vast library that, in
her later recollection,
she said she had
devoured every book in.
>>It could be that this is where
she got much of her knowledge
that she was famous
for in later life.
>>So Blavatsky had a taste
for the exotic from very
early childhood because
of the cosmopolitan
circumstances of her family.
>>As a child, Helena
displayed unusual behavior.
She had disturbing visions,
spoke to invisible playmates,
and told stories of
exotic adventures
where she was the heroine.
These stories were so
vivid that her sister
was sure she must've really
had these experiences, perhaps
in a previous incarnation.
Her family was often
concerned about her future.
>>About age 17,
so the story goes,
she was taunted by
an English governess
that nobody would
be interested in her
because she was
temperamental, she
was difficult to get along
with, she was extremely willful.
And she said, well, even
old Blavatsky over here,
the plumeless raven,
would never be interested.
He was a man, so far
as we understand,
was about 39 years
old at the time.
So he was over twice her age.
Anyway, she took the
dar, or however it was,
and the proposal came,
and they were married.
But she was not interested
in being anybody's wife.
And it only lasted
a couple of months,
and off she went, beginning 20
years, really, of world travel.
The question of who,
what, where is God,
and what was the
immortal spirit of man?
This was a question that
had always troubled her.
>>So whether it was a romantic
infatuation or a spiritual one,
she had begun to
conceive of herself
as wanting to travel in
pursuit of spiritual mysteries
and truth.
>>She would have
been one of the very,
very few women who
travelled alone.
>>Her behavior was
totally outside the norm,
outside boundaries
for a woman in that,
unless the person happened
to be a queen or someone who
was in an inherited
position of authority.
>>There's not much said
about what she was doing,
except that she apparently
went to those locations
where the esoteric or occult
knowledge was prominent.
>>She traveled to
India, the Far East.
She traveled to America,
North and South,
investigating mystic
traditions the world around.
>>Deeply interested in
the beliefs and cultures
of the world, HPB's
journeys were extensive.
In trying to piece together
the events of her life,
more often than not, we
encounter conflicting stories.
Her own accounts
are sometimes vastly
different than those of others.
>>One of the stories
she told about herself
was that she had been
a soldier, and she
had been a soldier in the
army of Giuseppe Garibaldi who
was fighting in those years
trying to unify Italy.
In this Battle of Mentana,
which was 1867, Garibaldi lost.
Now Madame Blavatsky said that
she had been severely wounded
in the battle, and she
had been left for dead
on the battlefield.
She loved to tell this story,
and it was very dramatic.
And sometimes, she'd even
show scars and everything.
Her next phase was
wondering mostly
in Eastern Europe in the
company of a man named
Agardi Metrovich, who was
a Hungarian opera singer,
and also a political radical
who involved her in the struggle
against the Catholic
domination of Italy.
>>He got a job with a touring
company, or a job in Cairo,
probably with the
Cairo opera house.
They got on a ship.
There were 400 passengers on it.
And it had a cargo
in part of gunpowder.
And the ship blew up
off the coast of Greece.
Agardi went down with the ship.
Most of the people went
down with the shift.
Blavatsky survived.
So there she was, at
the age of about 40.
She didn't have
any support again.
She went on to
Cairo, and she tried
to establish a life
for herself there.
And how she supported
yourself was giving seances.
She connected with
the community there
that were into
paranormal phenomenon.
She tried to be a medium.
>>Although very interested
in spiritualism,
HPB's understanding
of the phenomena
was somewhat different
than her fellow mediums.
But she did explore
this world, and produced
many manifestations.
>>She could slow time down.
Some other examples where
she could make things
appear or disappear.
Yes, all of these were
demonstrated by her.
Whether these were
tricks or not,
many would probably
say they were.
>>In 1873, Madame Blavatsky
continued her spiritual journey
and set sail for
the United States.
>>She joined the hundreds
of thousands of people
at that time in the 1870s
who were going to America.
America was the place to go.
At that time, spiritualism
was a very exciting subject
to Americans.
People were open to the
ideas of the paranormal.
People with psychic
ability who were
touring on the
vaudeville circuit.
People lined up to see
their performances,
to attend their seances.
And I think she
probably thought,
this would be some place where
they might find me interesting.
And they did.
>>Upon her arrival in
New York, Blavatsky
was virtually penniless.
She had occasional
income from the family,
but she had to work.
She worked making artificial
flowers in a factory.
>>She was looking
for a way that she
could continue to survive
when she read in the paper
stories written by a
man named Henry Olcott.
>>Henry Steel Olcott
was a respected member
of New York society.
He had worked for the
"New York Tribune,"
was a special
investigator on corruption
during the Civil War, and was
one of a three-member panel
appointed to investigate the
assassination of President
Lincoln.
He was also a lawyer with a
prosperous business in New York
City.
With a lingering interest in
spiritualism from his youth,
Olcott decided to investigate
some intriguing spirit
manifestations
that were occurring
at a farmhouse in Vermont.
Convinced of the
validity of the spirits,
he wrote an account
of his observations
for the New York papers.
He then headed back
to the farmhouse
to investigate the
phenomena further.
>>It was a farm run by two
brothers named Eddy-- the Eddy
brothers, who were mediums.
And they were giving
these seances.
People from New York or
wherever would come up.
They would stay there.
They had room and board.
And in the evening, they
could attend the performances.
>>Their home became a gathering
place for spiritualists
to witness physical phenomena.
So entities would appear
and walk around the room,
and be touched by the
persons in attendance.
The heyday of
spiritualism involved
physical manifestations,
and the Eddy brothers
were famous for
providing a plethora
of unusual and
fascinating appearances.
>>Madame Blavatsky was
intrigued both by a desire
to continue her investigation
into spiritualist phenomena,
and perhaps to meet the author
of these interesting articles.
>>She was driven by
the desire for fame
constantly, even when it
was not in her interest
to thrust herself
into the headlines.
>>So she was at this
Eddy Brother's farm.
>>According to Olcott, HPB
certainly stood out in a crowd.
"My eye was first attracted by
a scarlet, Garibaldian shirt
she wore, as in vivid contrast
with the dull colors around.
Her hair was a thick
blond mop worn shorter
than the shoulders, and it
stood out from her head,
silken soft and
crinkled to the roots.
I whispered to my
companion, good gracious,
look at that
specimen, will you?"
Olcott recalled that Madame
Blavatsky went outside
and rolled herself a cigarette.
He walked over to her and
said, [SPEAKING FRENCH],
and offered her a light.
Later, he said that their
acquaintance began in smoke,
but it stirred up a
great and permanent fire.
>>He thought she
was fascinating.
She told him all stories about
being wounded with Garibaldi,
and she had on kind
of beatnik clothes.
She wasn't unattractive.
She was not as obese as
she became later in life,
but she was a nice
looking, middle aged
woman who was
dressed peculiarly.
He thought she was the most
fascinating person he had ever
met.
>>Not only was all Olcott's
first meeting with Blavatsky
memorable, but
the manifestations
they experienced
together at the Eddy Farm
convinced him of how
extraordinary she us.
According to HPB, the
spirits they encountered
during their seances
were numerous,
and many were familiar to her.
"There was a
Georgian boy dressed
in a historical
Caucasian attire.
I recognized and
questioned in Georgian
upon circumstances
known only to myself.
I was understood and answered."
"A little old man appears.
He's dressed as Persian
merchants generally are.
His dress is perfect
as a national costume.
He speaks his name
in a loud whisper.
It is an old man
whom I and my family
have known for 20
years at Tiflis.
He says, half in Georgia
man half in Persian,
that he has got a big
secret to tell me,
and comes at three different
times vainly seeking
to finish his sentence."
"A man of gigantic
stature emerges forth,
dressed in the
picturesque attire
of the warriors of Kurdistan.
He does not speak, but bows
in the oriental fashion,
and lifts up his
spear ornamented
with bright-colored
feathers, shaking
it-- a token of welcome.
An old woman appears
with Russian headgear.
She comes out and
addresses me in Russian,
calling me by an endearing term
that she used in my childhood.
I recognize an old servant of my
family, a nurse of my sister."
Their friendship solidified, and
the two returned to New York.
Shortly after
their arrival, they
moved in together--
not as a couple,
but more as kindred spirits.
>>That was very unusual.
There was no sexual contact
with them as far as is known.
They were like comrades,
or brother and sister,
or professional colleagues.
In fact, they liked
each other enormously.
They got on.
And there was a great affection.
>>She only became
a spiritual teacher
after she made the crucial
connection with Henry Steel
Olcott, who at the time was
a prominent spiritualist,
and who became her entre
into the world New York
spiritualism.
She begins to write
letters to the editor,
either defending spiritualists
or attacking their critics,
making a name for herself in the
spiritualist press where Olcott
is already fairly well known.
"I am here in this
country sent by my lodge
on behalf of truth and
modern spiritualism,
and it is my most
sacred duty to unveil
what it is and expose
what it is not.
Perhaps did I arrive
here 100 years too soon?
Maybe, and I'm afraid
it is so, for people
seem to care every day less for
truth, and every more for gold.
My feeble protest and
endeavors will be of no avail.
Nevertheless, I am ever
ready for the grand battle,
and perfectly prepared to
bear any consequences that
may fall to my lot."
>>There was a place
that they stayed
called the lamasery,
in which Blavatsky
had an apartment loaded
with some of her collections
from India and elsewhere.
And she would hold
soirees and tell stories.
And she very quickly
became very well known
amongst the elite and
the intellectuals.
>>Blavatsky starts
to become a book
author in our her
own right, slowly
beginning to work on what
become "Isis Unveiled."
>>This was HPB's
first major work,
and offers her insights on
both Eastern and Western
religion and philosophy.
>>Olcott was her collaborator
in the writing process, which
involved many strange
phenomena, which convinced him
that she was being assisted
by invisible helpers,
not only in the spirit world
but living men elsewhere
who were communicating
telepathically
or occupying her body,
and writing through her.
>>Blavatsky explained that
these invisible helpers
were adepts or
masters who were part
of a brotherhood of
enlightened spiritual beings.
>>Olcott talks about hands
appearing mysteriously
and writing during the
night while she's asleep.
The composition process
of "Isis Unveiled"
is only the first instance
where the authorship of items
that appear under her
name is somewhat confused,
because both she and
Olcott say that there were
many others helping
behind the scenes.
>>She started writing,
and she said, well,
I get it from my masters.
They're dictating to me.
Or I see it in the astral
light, the inner worlds.
And I remember when I first read
that, I said, oh yeah, right.
And I found myself very soon
running back for a glossary
because the terminology
was a huge barrier.
I didn't know what all
this Eastern philosophical
terminology meant.
And yet, here was a
person who was touching
every conceivable
subject of importance
in areas of religion and
philosophy and science,
written with knowledge.
And I said, how can a
person know so much about so
many things, and handle
it with skill in this way?
I just didn't know.
>>HPB communicated mainly with
two masters-- Morya and Koot
Hoomi.
>>These people lived in Tibet,
but they weren't Tibetans.
They were Indians.
And the Brotherhood had picked
her to disseminate their ideas,
as much as they want
to reveal to the world,
through the Madame.
>>They feel they can
do more for the world
by not being visible
personalities.
And there has been a lot
of interesting developments
of that idea where one hears
about descended masters and so
forth.
They themselves say, no,
no, we're fully physical.
We are what we are by
virtue of our training.
We have spent our
lifetime pursuing
spiritual and philosophical
and scientific questions,
and we feel that we have some
answers that we can provide
that help humanity to
understand what they are,
where they came
from-- the answers
to the questions of
ultimate concern.
>>These masters are more
spiritually evolved.
That means that they can live
longer-- hundreds of years--
they have much more
knowledge, they
are almost-- if you can use
an analogy, almost resembling,
we might say, the
hidden hand theory,
which means that
behind this world,
there is a small
cadre of individuals
who are controlling things.
And so these masters are in
separate brotherhoods in India,
in Egypt, and elsewhere who
are helping to perhaps control
the progress of the planet
and spreading the wisdom.
>>While living in New York,
many guests visited the lamasery
and were entertained and
intrigued by HPB's stories.
They were also touched by
something profoundly important
in her words.
>>The two of them had
many discussions ,
and they also had many
visitors to their apartment--
people who were also
interested in the occult,
who found that everything
that Madame had to say very
interesting.
And at some point, Olcott
said to this little group,
wouldn't it be useful to
form a club or a society
to study the occult
phenomenon further?
And Madame Blavatsky said,
yes, that's a very good idea.
>>The Theosophical Society
was formed in 1875,
and still exists today with
branches all over the world.
>>And the original
objective of the society
was very simple,
one sentence long--
to collect and
diffuse all knowledge
of the laws of the
universe, period.
>>Once a student abandoned the
old trodden highway of routine,
and enters upon the solitary
path of independent thought,
god-ward, he use a theosophist,
an original thinker,
a seeker after the eternal truth
with an inspiration of his own
to solve the universal problems.
According to HPB,
theosophy, or divine wisdom,
refers to the ultimate truth
of the supreme, the cosmos,
and humanity.
It is a truth that has
existed from the dawn of time.
>>Theosophy some
way a connection
between the world
and the divine.
And what is in the world
reflects the divine,
and is the divine.
So the idea is a
unified teaching
in which everything
literally is God.
>>There has been some
question about how
the masters communicated with
HPB from their home in Tibet.
Along with Olcott, many
of Blavatsky's followers
claimed to see these
masters as well.
Some explained this as
examples of astral projection.
>>There is quite a bit mentioned
about out of body experiences,
or astral projection.
So it could very
well be that this
was the true purpose
of the society.
How do you, in fact, go beyond
your ordinary, imperfect self
and become perfected?
To become an adept,
for instance.
And it seems to me that
if you put this together
with the notion
of the masters, it
could very well be that
the masters were perceived
to be human beings who projected
themselves out of the body.
And that was the reason why
they can go literally anywhere
in the world to communicate
with individuals.
That is the reason
why masters were not
looked upon with skepticism,
that they did have ability,
and that they themselves--
theosophists-- expected
to have this same ability.
>>Perhaps this helps to explain
some of the unusual phenomena
that HPB was said to perform.
>>Olcott describes
her in some cases
is performing phenomena that
are hard to explain now,
but perhaps only either
genuineness or hypnosis
explains her being able
to physically transform
her appearance into that
of a man with black hair,
and then change
back into herself.
Olcott describes
things like this
that are just
impossible to interpret,
but remain fascinating as
to what was really going on.
>>"Isis Unveiled" was
published in 1877,
and the first edition
sold out within 10 days.
Not surprisingly, the
reviews were mixed.
The "New York
Herald" called it one
of the most remarkable
productions of the century,
while "The Sun" called
it discarded rubbish.
Reviews inside,
HPB was undoubtedly
pleased her message was
reaching a wider audience.
Eventually, the
decision was made
to spread the message
of theosophy further.
>>They remained in
New York until 1978,
when the decision was made--
probably on Olcott's advice--
that they-- Blavatsky
and he-- go to India.
Which he considered to be the
land of the sacred wisdom,
where more of the sacred
wisdom could be found
than any other
place in the world.
And that was the
reason why they went.
They were received
with open arms
by the native
populace, the Indians,
because they were perceived
to be two individuals who
came to investigate
their religion,
not to try to convert them to
Christianity, as was the usual.
>>The British had
ruled India since 1858.
Even before then, European
commercial interests
had been in control.
There was no lack of
Indians who saw themselves
through European eyes
as backward heathens.
>>The natives felt that their
cultures were under assault
by the West, and particularly
the missionaries.
And they saw
Blavatsky and Olcott
as very welcome
allies in the struggle
to revive their own
cultural traditions,
and shake off the
domination of Christianity.
>>This was the beginning
of Olcott's work
to try to revive Buddhism in
the south and southeast Asia.
And for a large degree,
Olcott was successful.
>>Blavatsky also supposedly gave
Indians a better understanding
and more respect for
their own culture.
And it's possible
to connect some dots
between her admiration
for the Indians
and her respect for them,
and Indian nationalism
through the first half
of the 20th century,
and the ultimate
independence of India.
>>They were the first
Westerners to become Buddhists
in a formal, official ceremony.
There were certain
ways Westerners
who became admirers of
Buddhism before that,
but never this kind
of formal affiliation.
>>Once they became
established, eventually they
headed over to Madras,
and they bought
some property called
Huddleston Gardens.
And that became the
future headquarters
of the Theosophical Society.
It was around this
time that they
met AP Sinnett, was to become
a very important figure later
on in this society.
Sinnett was the editor
of the "Pioneer,"
and he publicized the coming
of the two theosophists.
And he had, after
meeting Blavatsky,
some questions about
theosophy, what
the teaching was all
about, and apparently was
contacted by a master
through a letter.
And out of this came
a correspondence
that lasted from
about 1880 to 1886.
The number of letters-- it was
about 145 that were exchanged.
All of these letters were
written by Koot Hoomi or Morya.
>>Sinnett was not
the only one who
received letters
from the masters.
There were those who
believed wholeheartedly
in their authenticity.
Others had their doubts.
>>She did miracles like crazy.
The letters from Koot Hoomi
giving instructions to her
or just giving information,
were flying like crazy.
They landed on people's heads.
They landed next to
the [? monetable ?].
The letters sometimes
came through the mail.
Whoever she wished to
influence or wished
to convince that she
was who she said she was
came through these letters
which I referred to, not really
facetiously, but as
the astral post office.
People were-- a lot of these
people, like Alfred Sinnett,
were people who were
almost like Olcott.
They wanted very badly to
believe in what she said.
They also don't want to be
made to seem like fools,
so their job was to keep their
own belief, to support her,
to prop her up, and try
to convince everyone
that, yes, she was
right, yes, there
were this brotherhood, because
the idea of the brotherhood
it's was intriguing.
And in a way, it still is.
I mean, the idea
of a group that's
looking out for the best
interests of the world, that
reincarnate when the
world needs them,
someone that's keeping
track of things.
It's not just all chaos.
>>Now the big question is,
were these letters genuine?
Were they actually written by
masters from Tibet or India?
Or were they for frauds?
>>The allegations of fraud that
are best known and best founded
in my conclusion
are those associated
with something called
the Shrine Room that
was in the Adyar headquarters.
And there, there was
a room in the wall
of which was a wooden cabinet
where letters from the masters
would appear.
Miraculously in
that, a person would
speak some concern
or question, and then
a letter answering that
would appear within minutes.
And they would open the door,
and there the letter would be.
It did not take long
for suspicions to arise.
And when two household
employees-- Alexis and Emma
Coulomb-- confessed to
a Christian magazine
that they had assisted Blavatsky
in fraudulent phenomena,
stuffing these
letters through a hole
in the wall behind the shrine.
This caused an uproar
where the whole business
of receiving letters
from the masters
became the center
of the accusations
against Blavatsky of fraud.
>>When Madame Blavatsky
was accused of fraud,
her supporters
responded immediately.
They blamed the Coulombs
for making the story up
in retaliation for being fired.
All of this occurred while
Madame Blavatsky was out
of the country.
Whether true or not,
these allegations
set in motion potentially
catastrophic events.
>>She attracted the attention
of a scientific group,
the Society for
Psychical Research.
This was a British group who
was the closest thing there
was at the time to a
scientific organization that
was interested in
the paranormal.
They were a very
respectable group.
They decided to investigate
the Theosophical Society.
They sent an
investigator to India.
His name was Hodgson.
And he snooped
around for months.
He talked to everyone
he could find.
>>He made what he felt to be
very careful investigations,
and he issued a report.
>>This was Richard Hodgson
first major investigation
of this kind, and
many theosophists
were concerned about
his lack of experience.
After months of what he felt
was careful investigation,
he concluded that there was no
secret brotherhood of masters,
and all the correspondence from
the Mahatmas was fraudulent.
>>The Hodgson Report
forever condemned
Blavatsky in terms of
general public perception
by words that have been repeated
many times ever since that one.
One of the most ingenious
and accomplished impostors
in history.
Blavatsky and Olcott
both blamed each other
for the sensationalism that led
to the investigation, and then
the negative report.
So while he was telling her
that her sensationalism had 3/4
ruined the TS and
another dose would
kill it deader than
a door nail, she
was saying that
if Olcott had not
made such a cult of the masters,
inflaming people's imagination
with tall tales about them, that
the Indian followers and then
the Westerners would never have
become so crazed with worship
of the masters that everything
would have collapsed
in this embarrassing
humiliation.
That is what she was
saying, and her quote
is, "when you speak of
the imaginary Mahatmas,
you are right."
But she's not taking
responsibility herself
at this point.
She's saying, yes, the
masters have been blown out
of all proportion, and
theosophist faith is now
built on a house of sand,
but it's Olcott's fault
because he fanned the flames
of the sensationalism,
conveniently forgetting
who caused Olcott to become
such an enthusiast of the
masters in the first place.
The big turning point
in the relationship
of Olcott and Blavatsky--
if it could be pinpointed
to a single event-- was
Richard Hodgson showing Olcott
a letter in which HPB
ridiculed him, and said
that he was completely
under her sway.
She treated his belief in
her as an object of contempt.
And he said, after reading that,
he was completely distraught
and contemplated suicide.
Olcott begins to question
what he's experienced,
and to say that sometimes she
was deliberately misleading,
sometimes the phenomena
were not genuine.
He however never goes
so far as to clue
that everything he's
experienced was trickery.
At the time, the Hodgson
Report was a scandal
for the Theosophical Society.
100 years later, the Society
of Psychical Research
formally acknowledged that
the original report was
badly flawed, and there was
still many unanswered questions
concerning the life and
work of Madame Blavatsky.
But the damage was done.
In with a heavy heart,
HPB left India for good.
Olcott remained to carry on the
work they had started together.
With a few stops along
the way, she eventually
settled down in London.
"My heart is broken
physically and morally.
For the first, I do not care."
"Master shall take
care it does not
burst so long as I am needed.
In the second case,
there is no help.
I was ready to shed the last
drop of life in me, give up
every hope for the
last shred of-- I
shall not say happiness-- but
rest and comfort in this life
of torture of the
cause I serve and
for every true theosophist."
She again presided
over a lodge in London
that was a very hot ticket
to be invited to attend.
And it was not
simply theosophists
that came to see her, but
anybody who was interested
in the subjects
that she discussed,
and in meeting a very
controversial and intriguing
figure.
>>Then in the last
two years of her life,
she drew the attention of
a well known British woman
named Annie Besant.
Annie Besant was a feminist,
a union organizer, a writer,
a person who was enormously
admired in British society.
Getting the approval of
a woman like Annie Besant
brought her an enormous
number of new converts,
much better press than
she'd ever had before.
Madame Besant left the
Theosophical Society
to Annie Besant.
She turned it over to her.
And with that, she achieved
the ultimate respectability.
>>Her sincerity increased
over the course of her career,
so she learns from our mistakes.
And in the last few
years, when she's
doing most of her
writings, she's
a much more careful
and responsible person
than she was when she was in
the throes of propagandizing
for Theosophical
and the masters,
and getting herself in
the headlines constantly.
>>During this
period of her life,
she wrote "The Secret
Doctrine-- The Synthesis
of Science, Religion,
and Philosophy."
This is Blavatsky's
masterwork on theosophy,
covering cosmic, planetary,
and human evolution, as well
as science, religion,
and mythology.
With much of her
writing over the years,
questions have been raised
regarding source material.
>>She was careless and can
be blamed for plagiarism
in terms of improper citations.
But she did try
to give citations,
and was adhering to the
standards of the day
as best she was able to.
She never deliberately
misrepresents
the content of any spiritual
teaching, as best I can tell.
And obviously, that means she
wants to be taken seriously
as somebody participating
in the intellectual debates
of her time.
>>I think if her work
had not been completed,
and she would have continued
on for a while longer.
It was influenza.
She was sitting in her easy
chair with friends around her.
They knew she was dying.
And off she went.
It was that simple.
Age 59.
>>Every big newspaper in the
United States had at least one,
and sometimes two,
articles about her death,
and they were always
on the front page,
because she, by this time,
was a world celebrity.
Some people didn't know what
she was a celebrity for,
but they knew she was
famous for being famous.
>>Helena Petrovna Blavatsky--
controversial, extraordinary,
larger than life,
harbinger of the new age.
Whether a fraud or a
messenger of secret wisdom,
she has touched our world
and our lives forever.
>>There are some who
would just flatly reject
the idea that there wasn't any
kind of trickery or dishonesty.
Others who would become angry
that the subject was raised
but still admit
that, yes, there was,
but it is outweighed by all the
positive things that she did.
And then others for whom
they have no difficulty
acknowledging that, and saying,
yes, there's definitely a lot
to question here, but
to be a theosophist
does not mean to be a follower
of Blavatsky or anyone else.
It means to be a seeker of
divine wisdom, that does not
require belief in any
claims about anything.
>>Probably the thing that
she is most well known for,
and the thing that she
should be known for,
is a respect for Eastern
culture and Eastern religion--
for Hinduism, Buddhism--
and bringing those ideas
to the West.
>>The very fact
that she did compare
one religion with another
was, in fact, I think,
the beginnings of the
comparative study of religion
that we follow today.
>>I feel inspired by her vision
of a global spirituality.
All of the Westerners
who have gone East
in pursuit of a sacred journey
or mission are in some sense
indebted to her, because
she's the first person who
created that model of
the spiritual traveler.
>>A mystic force is rising.
It is but the first
rustling, but it
is a superhuman rustling.
It is supernatural only for
the superstitious and ignorant.
The spirit of truth
is passing now
over the face of dark
waters, and in parting them
is compelling them to reveal
their spiritual treasures.
And this spirit is a force
that cannot be hindered and can
never, never be stopped.
[MUSIC PLAYING]